Articulate stability goals (#625)
ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals: principles.rst

as we hope not to make the current situation worse.

From `#378`_, slightly generalized.

GHC stability principles
--------------------------

The Haskell ecosystem has a built-in tension between stability and innovation.

One the one hand, breaking changes impose heavy costs:

* Users keep having to update their code
* Library authors keep having to update their code
* Updating to a later version of a library can in turn force taking on new dependencies.

These difficulties add friction, discourage adoption, and make Haskell an unpredictable investment.

On the other hand, GHC has always sought to be a laboratory for innovation.  If the stability guarantees are too onerous, we risk imposing a different set of costs:

* Volunteers may get discouraged by the hoops they have to jump through to get a change agreed.
* The language may become stuck in a local optimum, because moving to a better design would require breaking changes.

> * GHC may become encrusted with cruft and workarounds that exist to preserve existing, but undesirable, behaviour.

Reviewer: Is `encrufted` a word we can use here, @goldfirere? ;-)

We can't navigate this tension with simple all-or-nothing rules.  We have to take each case on its merits, aware of both sets of costs.  Rather than starting the debate from scratch each time, we can have some general rules, or principles, to guide us.  The `GHC base library proposal <https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/blob/main/proposals/accepted/051-ghc-base-libraries.rst>`_ made a start in this direction; this section discusses GHC itself.

Assumptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~

We assume:

* That we have adopted the  `GHC base library proposal <https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/blob/main/proposals/accepted/051-ghc-base-libraries.rst>`_, which establishes the ``ghc-experimental`` package.

> * That we have adopted some form of `GHC Proposal #601 <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/601>`_, which allows us to designate extension flags as Experimental or Stable.  (Maybe other categories too, but at least these two.)  Moreover, we have actually categorised existing extensions, at least far enough to identify the Stable ones.  This is still a work in progress.

Reviewer 2: Can we reformulate this to make this document self-standing, rather than relying on an as-yet-unadopted proposal? I think all we need in this document is that there should be some notion of "experimental" extensions or features; exactly which those are would be good to clarify but is secondary to the principles.

Terminology
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We define a **stable Haskell package** as follows. A stable Haskell package

* Does not use Experimental extensions.

> * Does not use experimental features.  (Examples: ``INCOHERENT`` pragmas, use of the Javascript or Wasm back end, builds on non-tier-1 platforms.)

Reviewer 2: I think we should differentiate "undefined behaviour" from "experimental features". `INCOHERENT` is not really experimental (i.e. its design is not expected to change), but its specification explicitly permits the compiler to make arbitrary choices (so packages may not depend on those choices being consistent across releases).

```suggestion
* Does not use experimental features (examples: use of the Javascript or Wasm back end, builds on non-tier-1 platforms).
* Does not rely on undefined behaviour (example: ``INCOHERENT`` instance selection).
```

* Does not use ``-Werror`` in its default build configuration.
* Explicitly specifies a language edition (``Haskell98``, ``GHC2021``), in the source code or the build configuration.
* Depends only on stable Haskell packages.

Boot packages shipped with GHC will be designated as stable or not in the documentation:

* ``base`` is stable, despite depending on unstable packages.

> * Any GHC-internal packages (e.g. ``ghc-internal``, ``ghc-prim``, ``ghc-bignum``) are not stable and may change API without notice and between minor releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Any GHC-internal packages (e.g. ``ghc-internal``, ``ghc-prim``, ``ghc-bignum``) are not stable and may change API without notice and between minor releases of GHC (the package version itself still follows the PVP).
```
Just a clarification. Is that correct?

Reviewer 3: The agreement with CLC was that `ghc-internals` follows PVP.

Reviewer 2: Yes, the "GHC's base libraries" document says that internal libraries follow PVP, and that as a consequence internal libraries may get a major version bump between minor GHC releases (https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/blob/main/proposals/accepted/051-ghc-base-libraries.rst#versions-and-backports).

This does risk an awkward situation if we want to backport a bug fix that necessarily changes an API, because a major version bump might not be possible. We could potentially avoid that risk by bumping the supermajor version of internal libraries on each GHC release. But the same problem arises for `base`, as described in the linked document.

* *Warnings*

  * ``-Werror`` is excluded because otherwise (GR1) would be broken whenever we add a warning.
  * Similarly ``-Werror=flag`` is excluded to allow warnings to fire in more cases without breaking (GR1).
  * It's fine for a stable package to use ``-Werror`` in a CI build, to help the author find warnings.  But not in the default configuration, used by others when installing the package.
  * There is no stability guarantee that a later GHC will emit the same warnings as an earlier GHC.  A notable case in point is deprecations, where a later GHC may advise authors to (say) import a function from a different module; while an earlier GHC obviously will not.  In general, warnings should not be regarded as stable.

* *Language editions*.

  * A stable package should specify an explicit language edition because subsequent releases of GHC might change the default language edition.  So if the package does not pin a specific language edition, it might then fail when compiled with a later release.

>   * Language editions like ``GHC202x`` should use only Stable extensions.
> 
> * (GR1) is restricted to Stable extensions, and excludes dependence on ``ghc-experimental``.  That leaves the "experimental" space open to more rapid change.

Reviewer 2: I think we can avoid the need to define a "Stable" category, and simply talk about experimental or not. That avoids making assumptions about how #601 will be resolved.

```suggestion
  * Language editions like ``GHC202x`` should not use experimental extensions.

* (GR1) is restricted to non-experimental extensions, and excludes dependence on ``ghc-experimental``.  That leaves the "experimental" space open to more rapid change.
```

* For new language extensions, (GR1) is trivially satisfied if the change is gated behind an extension flag.

* (GR1) is certainly broken if, say, we turn a warning into an error.

* We will need to enumerate the "experimental features" mentioned above.

Exceptions (GR2)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**General rule (GR2)**.   *We may break (GR1), but only with a compelling reason, and with careful consideration of impact.*

Compelling reasons include

* To fix a security loophole.
* To fix an outright bug in GHC.  It is possible that some code might accidentally rely on that bug; but we can't use that as a reason to grandfather the bug indefinitely.  (Imagine that 2+77 = 80.)  There is a judgement call here, about what a "bug" is.
* To fix a design flaw in the language.   The switch to simple subsumption is an example of such a change, albeit one that was not well handled at the time.

This list is not exhaustive, but the emphasis is on "compelling reason", bearing in mind the costs that any change imposes on users.

> Fixing an outright bug, or correcting (what we now consider to be) a design flaw in the language,counts as "compelling" reasons, even though they threaten stability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fixing an outright bug, or correcting (what we now consider to be) a design flaw in the language, counts as "compelling" reasons, even though they threaten stability.
```

Assumptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~

We assume:

* That we have adopted the  `GHC base library proposal <https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/blob/main/proposals/accepted/051-ghc-base-libraries.rst>`_, which establishes the ``ghc-experimental`` package.
* That we have identified some extensions as "Experimental".  These extensions may well change, and are subject to
  much weaker stability goals.  `GHC Proposal #601 <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/601>`_, describes a plan along these lines, but all we need for this document is a list of Experimental extensions.

Terminology
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We define a **stable Haskell package** as follows. A stable Haskell package

* Does not use Experimental extensions.
* Does not use experimental features.  (Examples: use of the Javascript or Wasm back end, builds on non-tier-1 platforms.)
* Does not rely on explicitly-undefined behaviour. (Example: ``INCOHERENT`` instance selection.)
* Does not use ``-Werror`` in its default build configuration.
* Explicitly specifies a language edition (``Haskell98``, ``GHC2021``), in the source code or the build configuration.

> * Depends only on stable Haskell packages.

Reviewer 4: Sorry to be a curmudgeon about this again. But the proportion of packages that don't depend transitively on Template Haskell (which is, rightly, considered unstabled) is tiny. If we state stability goals only for packages which don't depend transitively on Template Haskell, then we're making a largely theoretical statement.

Proposal: drop this condition from the definition of stable package, and GR1 becomes “if the dependencies work, then the package work”. Much more compelling goal in my opinion.

Fixing an outright bug, or correcting (what we now consider to be) a design flaw in the language, counts as "compelling" reasons, even though they threaten stability.

* We want Haskell to be a beautiful, elegant language, not one riddled with inconsistencies, grandfathered in simply because fixing the inconsistency would risk some breakage.
* Similarly, we acknowledge the possibility of making major changes, if we truly believe that they will make the language better, and/or open the door to other improvements.
* Yet we should not make such changes lightly, because they impose real costs.
* Choices should be informed by the amount of breakage, e.g. by compiling thousands of packages in Hackage.
* Changes, especially significant changes, should be introduced gradually: the subject of (GR3).

Deprecations (GR3)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**General rule (GR3)**.  *If we break (GR1), for a compelling reason (GR2), we should whenever possible provide a deprecation cycle, as well as copious publicity, so that users are alerted (via depreciation warnings) to the upcoming change, have time to adapt, and can raise concerns.*

> A deprecation cycle should give at least one GHC major release for authors to make changes.  In th case of changes that are more difficult to accommodate, we may consider a second cycle.  (Side note: there is a `separate conversation going on <https://github.com/haskell/pvp/issues/58>`_ about deprecation warnings and the PVP.)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A deprecation cycle should give at least one GHC major release for authors to make changes.  In the case of changes that are more difficult to accommodate, we may consider a second cycle.  (Side note: there is a `separate conversation going on <https://github.com/haskell/pvp/issues/58>`_ about deprecation warnings and the PVP.)
```

Author: thnaks

Assumptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~

We assume:

* That we have adopted the  `GHC base library proposal <https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/blob/main/proposals/accepted/051-ghc-base-libraries.rst>`_, which establishes the ``ghc-experimental`` package.
* That we have identified some extensions as "Experimental".  These extensions may well change, and are subject to
  much weaker stability goals.  `GHC Proposal #601 <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/601>`_, describes a plan along these lines, but all we need for this document is a list of Experimental extensions.

Terminology
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We define a **stable Haskell package** as follows. A stable Haskell package

* Does not use Experimental extensions.

> * Does not use experimental features.  (Examples: use of the Javascript or Wasm back end, builds on non-tier-1 platforms.)

Reviewer 5: I think you don't need such clause at all: certainly you are responsible only for official GHC bindists. As long as there are no official releases for GHC JS / WASM / non-tier-1 platform, you are all good. 

Maybe just add a general note that "works with GHC X" throughout the document means "works with an official bindist of GHC X, released by GHC HQ".

> * Does not use experimental features.  (Examples: use of the Javascript or Wasm back end, builds on non-tier-1 platforms.)

Reviewer 5: > Stability of configurations lacking official bindists is hard to achieve (as the policy recognises) but seems entirely in scope, and users who build their own compilers from source distributions can still reasonably expect GHC not to break things unnecessarily.

That's an admirable goal, but why exclude GHC JS / WASM / non-tier-1 platforms then? 

> What I'm trying to express is the case of requiring a non-tier-1 platform.

Do you know any examples of it?

> * Does not use experimental features.  (Examples: use of the Javascript or Wasm back end, builds on non-tier-1 platforms.)

Reviewer 6: If we think of package as being parameterized over these things "a package built *for system*, *with dependencies*, etc." what we are defining here is the *domain* over which the other statements are evaluated. "we expect these things to hold true so long as ...". We're filtering package but also scenarios involving packages --- the filtering doesn't need to just be based on intrinsic properties of packages but also can be filtering of contexts in which packages are used.

* Does not rely on explicitly-undefined behaviour. (Example: ``INCOHERENT`` instance selection.)
* Does not use ``-Werror`` in its default build configuration.
* Explicitly specifies a language edition (``Haskell98``, ``GHC2021``), in the source code or the build configuration.

> 

Reviewer 2: See https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/625#discussion_r1413559957: stable packages need to have PVP-compliant version bounds, to allow for upgrades to their dependencies that fix compatibility with a newer GHC (e.g. because the dependency itself depends on something experimental).
```suggestion
* Accurately represents its build dependencies according to the PVP.

```

Reviewer 3: What section of the PVP are you referencing here? The spec is very vague:

> When publishing a Cabal package, you SHALL ensure that your dependencies in the build-depends field are accurate. This means specifying not only lower bounds, but also upper bounds on every dependency.

It gives some non-binding guidance later:

> To minimize breakage when new package versions are released, you can use dependencies that are insensitive to minor version changes (e.g. foo >= 1.2.1 && < 1.3). However, note that this approach is slightly risky: when a package exports more things than before, there is a chance that your code will fail to compile due to new name-clash errors. The risk from new name clashes may be small, but you are on the safe side if you import identifiers explicitly or using qualification.

Which indicates that minor release insensitive upper bounds can also cause issues.

It doesn't really specify properly what accurate dependencies are other than "must have any upper bound on all dependencies".

Reviewer 3: This is hard to qualify/articulate. 

A package may very well have lax bounds and never break.

For example, package A depends on package B. If I maintain both of them, I have "total awareness" of their APIs and as such an upper bound may be useless, since I can introduce a revision with an upper bound if I ever break package A.

This is the infamous difference of proactive and reactive upper bounds.

This text **could** demand a proactive upper bound policy: e.g. an upper bound must be at most the latest available package on hackage at the time (e.g. `base < 10000`  would violate that) and successfully build with it.

But that ignores the situation of valid reactive upper bound workflows.

Reviewer 3: My point is that both proactive and reactive are technically valid as per the PVP spec and this has even been a controversial topic amongst hackage trustees: https://github.com/haskell-infra/hackage-trustees/issues/375#issuecomment-1763507820

So my advice is to avoid wording that steers in either direction.

The "ecosystem" part of PVP is very badly written.

I'd go for something like: "A stable package has an upper bound policy that ensures resilience in light of a moving ecosystem and avoids breaking existing build plans.". The latter is a detail that's often overlooked, where revisions can break existing build plans.

You can't machine check this property easily, but I don't think we need to.

Stability (GR1)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> 

Author: (GR1) says (roughly) that if a package compiles with a particular GHC-X then it should compile with a later GHC-Y, where Y>X.   In principle it would be good if it also compiled with an *earlier* GHC-Z, where Z<X.   Of course, at a minimum, GHC-Z should understand all the extensions that GHC-X does.

If we extend extensions, even in non-breaking ways, that would cease to be true.  But it would mainly cease to be true in cases where GHC-Z just wouldn't understand the new code anyway, so it hardly matters.  

Example, suppose that instead of extending `ExplicitNameSpaces` we instead added a new extension `ExtendedExplicitNameSpaces` to cover the delta.  Well, the same packages P that need `ExtendedExplicitNameSpaces` then of course won't compile with GHC-Z (because it lacks that extension). 

So if we add a new extension
* We add some extra bureaucracy in documentation (we have a lot of extensions) and implementation.
* We don't gain much: the difference is that when compiling pacakge P with GHC-Z, we get "Undefined extension `ExtendedExplicitNameSpaces`" rather than a parse error.

Personally I think the pain does not justify the gain.  So I think that, in general, I'm OK with adding non-breaking functionality to an extension.   What do others think?   I think it would help if the final proposal was explicit on this point.

> 

Reviewer 7: E.g. `other-extensions` mentioned in https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/issues/623#issuecomment-1837589501, see https://cabal.readthedocs.io/en/stable/cabal-package.html#pkg-field-other-extensions

> 

Reviewer 3: > Personally I think the pain does not justify the gain. So I think that, in general, I'm OK with adding non-breaking functionality to an extension. What do others think?

This reminds me of the idea of "language edition as first class" that we scratched in https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/620

If language editions were first class, functionality changes would only be permitted in a new edition. 

Language extensions would then simply become partial configuration of the language edition. And the language edition would potentially be more than the sum of language extension knobs.

My feeling is that I'd rather not have extensions evolve, but the language/features somehow must. So until we get more agreement on the "first class language edition" idea, there's no better alternative than to allow adding non-breaking changes (we want less extensions, not more, right?).

> **General rule (GR1)**.  *A stable Haskell package P that works with GHC X should continue to work in subsequent releases of GHC, say GHC Y, provided P's dependencies work with GHC Y with only minor version bumps.*

Reviewer 2: "Latest releases" of dependencies seems too restrictive to me, given that P may be on an older major version of a dependency and the latest major release of that dependency may itself have breaking changes. I think that's what "minor version bumps" was trying to get at, but I agree it could be clarified.

Perhaps something like "provided that for each of P's dependencies, the latest release of the dependency that is compatible with P's version bounds works with GHC Y". Of course this implicitly assumes P has accurate version bounds (i.e. follows PVP) but I guess that belongs in the definition of "stable Haskell package".

> **General rule (GR1)**.  *A stable Haskell package P that works with GHC X should continue to work in subsequent releases of GHC, say GHC Y, provided P's dependencies work with GHC Y with only minor version bumps.*

Reviewer 5: It still does not make sense to me, the property you are talking about seems to be a property of a build plan, not of a package. A package itself does not have a single prescribed build plan, so "minor version bumps" is meaningless. 

I am aware of the issue of ecosystem upgrading in lockstep, but I'd suggest not to tackle it in this document.

> **General rule (GR1)**.  *A stable Haskell package P that works with GHC X should continue to work in subsequent releases of GHC, say GHC Y, provided P's dependencies work with GHC Y with only minor version bumps.*

Author: > It still does not make sense to me, the property you are talking about seems to be a property of a build plan, not of a package. A package itself does not have a single prescribed build plan, so "minor version bumps" is meaningless.

I see the difficulty but can you suggest a better way to phrase (GR1).  The intent is:
* If P's direct dependencies work with GHC Y, then so does P.

But that's a bit too vague.  Consider one of P's direct dependencies, Q.  It would be no good if the GHC-Y compatible version of Q exposes many more functions (major version bump), because that might break P.   How can we say that in a precise way?

Maybe it's best not to be too precise and stick with "If P's direct dependencies work with GHC Y, then so does P", but add some qualifying text to clarify?

Anyone?

> **General rule (GR1)**.  *A stable Haskell package P that works with GHC X should continue to work in subsequent releases of GHC, say GHC Y, provided P's dependencies work with GHC Y with only minor version bumps.*

Reviewer 5: >  It would be no good if the GHC-Y compatible version of Q exposes many more functions (major version bump), because that might break P. 

* True, but that's not really for GHC SC to tackle.
* According to PVP exposing "many more functions" is not necessarily a major version bump.

I'd go for "If P can be compiled against the latest versions of its direct dependencies with GHC X (!), and all latest versions of its direct dependencies work with GHC Y, then so does P". This is a less challenging notion than you and Adam seem to pursue, but precise and actionable.

> **General rule (GR1)**.  *A stable Haskell package P that works with GHC X should continue to work in subsequent releases of GHC, say GHC Y, provided P's dependencies work with GHC Y with only minor version bumps.*

Author: Hmm.  Suppose P worked perfectly fine with dependency Q-2.3.1.   Then the author of Q releases Q-2.4, and P breaks.  Well, the author of P might well put an upper bound of Q-2.3.1. 

Now a new release of GHC comes out, GHC-Y.  It would be desirable if P still worked when compiled with GHC-Y, would it not?.  But your rule offers no such guarantee, because it is not true that "P can be compiled against the latest version of Q". 

We cannot promise that Q-2.3.2 will be compatible with GHC-Y.  But if we could make it compatible with only a minor bump, to Q-2.3.2 say, then one might hope it would work.

Still, the weaker the guarantee, the easier it is to fulfill!  And it is more complicated to explain the stronger guarantee.

> **General rule (GR1)**.  *A stable Haskell package P that works with GHC X should continue to work in subsequent releases of GHC, say GHC Y, provided P's dependencies work with GHC Y with only minor version bumps.*

Reviewer 5: I believe that the weaker guarantee brings you 90% of potential benefit if fullfilled. You can always refine it later if you find the weaker notion too easy to achieve ;)

> We cannot promise that Q-2.3.2 will be compatible with GHC-Y. But if we could make it compatible with only a minor bump, to Q-2.3.2 say, then one might hope it would work.

Practically if there is `Q-2.4` already, `Q-2.3.2` almost certainly won't happen. Very few libraries care to maintain older major release series, there is zero incentive to do so unless you are paid. So I would not bother with a stronger guarantee, at least until our ecosystem is managed differently.

> **General rule (GR1)**.  *A stable Haskell package P that works with GHC X should continue to work in subsequent releases of GHC, say GHC Y, provided P's dependencies work with GHC Y with only minor version bumps.*

Reviewer 5: > Then it is possible to release Q-2.3.1.1 with the same API as Q-2.3.1 but compatible with GHC Y. 

As I mentioned above, very few packages would bother to release Q-2.3.X after Q-2.4. I know zero examples of it outside of few boot libraries (who begrudginly must do it sometimes). 

The advantage is an easy-to-understand and easy-to-apply definition, expressed in terms of packages. I don't think the more elaborate definition (which is yet to be written) buys you anything practically valuable, but I have no skin in the game; if GHC SC feels well equipped to discuss PVP intricacies, you do you.

> **General rule (GR1)**.  *A stable Haskell package P that works with GHC X should continue to work in subsequent releases of GHC, say GHC Y, provided P's dependencies work with GHC Y with only minor version bumps.*

Reviewer 8: I think it would be reasonable to say something weaker still that doesn't make any reference to the "latest" versions of anything:

```
A stable Haskell package P built against a set of package-version dependencies D that works with GHC X should continue to work in subsequent releases of GHC, say GHC Y, provided that the package-versions in D work with GHC Y.
```

It's not GHC's job to make sure that P's dependencies have released versions that are compatible with GHC Y. Perhaps the project is dead, perhaps the latest version is a total rewrite and they don't want to make a minor release. I think it's enough that GHC promises that _it's_ bit of the job, which is compiling your package given a set of pre-built dependencies, behaves the same. 

So the overall process might look like this:

1. P builds with GHC X, and depends on D-1, which works with GHC X but not GHC Y
2. P updates to depend on D-2, which works with both GHC X and Y
3. P builds with GHC Y

GR1 says that 2 and 3 should behave the same. Whether 1 and 2 behave the same (and how to fix it if they don't) is a problem for the maintainers of D and P.

Of course, if GR1 applies pointwise throughout the dependency tree, we might well hope that many of P's dependencies won't need version bumps to support GHC Y, and so we have fewer 1-2 steps to worry about. But I don't think we should make avoiding them part of GR1.

Consider one of P's dependencies, say Q.  It may need a minor version bump,
for example to accommodate changes to Template Haskell.  But the principle is that
provided the new Q works with GHC Y, and Q's API is unchanged (minor
version bump only), P should work too.

Notes and clarifications:

* The general goal of "works" includes both "compiles successfully" and "runs successfully, as fast as it did before".  That is a very demanding goal, so it has the status of a highly-sought-after aspiration rather than an unbreakable promise.

> * *Dependencies*.   If a package P depends directly on a package Q that suffers a major version bump to work with the new GHC, then (of course) P may not work with the new Q. A particular case in point is where P depends directly on packages that are tightly coupled to GHC; these packages will typically have a major bump with each GHC release:

Author: major!   I'll fix that

* We want Haskell to be a beautiful, elegant language, not one riddled with inconsistencies, grandfathered in simply because fixing the inconsistency would risk some breakage.
* Similarly, we acknowledge the possibility of making major changes, if we truly believe that they will make the language better, and/or open the door to other improvements.
* Yet we should not make such changes lightly, because they impose real costs.
* Choices should be informed by the amount of breakage, e.g. by compiling thousands of packages in Hackage.  Changes that break little or nothing need a much less compelling reason than changes that break a lot.
* Changes, especially significant changes, should be introduced gradually: the subject of (GR3).

Deprecations (GR3)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**General rule (GR3)**.  *If we break (GR1), for a compelling reason (GR2), we should whenever possible provide a deprecation cycle, as well as copious publicity, so that users are alerted (via depreciation warnings) to the upcoming change, have time to adapt, and can raise concerns.*

> A deprecation cycle should give at least one GHC major release for authors to make changes.  In the case of changes that are more difficult to accommodate, we may consider a second cycle.  (Side note: there is a `separate conversation going on <https://github.com/haskell/pvp/issues/58>`_ about deprecation warnings and the PVP.)

Reviewer 3: PVP 1.1 (not released yet) already has revised point 7 of PVP, removing the need (or rather recommendation) to do a major PVP bump for a mere deprecation.

So there's no discussion needed for that part anymore. It was already decided.

Assumptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~

We assume:

* That we have adopted the  `GHC base library proposal <https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/blob/main/proposals/accepted/051-ghc-base-libraries.rst>`_, which establishes the ``ghc-experimental`` package.
* That we have identified some extensions as "Experimental".  These extensions may well change, and are subject to
  much weaker stability goals.  `GHC Proposal #601 <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/601>`_, describes a plan along these lines, but all we need for this document is a list of Experimental extensions.

Terminology
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We define a **stable Haskell package** as follows. A stable Haskell package

* Does not use Experimental extensions.
* Does not use experimental features.  (Examples: use of the Javascript or Wasm back end, builds on non-tier-1 platforms.)
* Does not rely on explicitly-undefined behaviour. (Example: ``INCOHERENT`` instance selection.)
* Does not use ``-Werror`` in its default build configuration.
* Explicitly specifies a language edition (``Haskell98``, ``GHC2021``), in the source code or the build configuration.

Stability (GR1)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> **General rule (GR1)**.  *A stable Haskell package P that works with GHC X should continue to work in subsequent releases of GHC, say GHC Y, provided P's direct dependencies work with GHC Y with only minor version bumps.*

Reviewer 2: Based on the previous discussion about version bumps and PVP, I think it would better to drop the "with only minor version bumps" part of (GR1), because it isn't well-specified. Moreover we might imagine a package changing API depending on which GHC version is used. So perhaps something like this?

```suggestion
**General rule (GR1)**.  *A stable Haskell package P that works with GHC X should continue to work in subsequent releases of GHC, say GHC Y, provided P's direct dependencies (i) work with GHC Y and (ii) offer compatible APIs on GHC X and GHC Y.*
```

Author: >  I think it would better to drop the "with only minor version bumps" part of (GR1), because it isn't well-specified. 

I missed that somehow.  What exactly is not well specified?

Reviewer 2: I'm referring to this discussion (but I had to start a new thread to make a suggested edit): https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/625#discussion_r1413217877

I think I roughly understand the idea that "with only minor version bumps" is intended to capture, but pinning it down precisely seems surprisingly tricky.

These difficulties add friction, discourage adoption, and make Haskell an unpredictable investment.

On the other hand, GHC has always sought to be a laboratory for innovation.  If the stability guarantees are too onerous, we risk imposing a different set of costs:

* Volunteers may get discouraged by the hoops they have to jump through to get a change agreed.
* The language may become stuck in a local optimum, because moving to a better design would require breaking changes.
* We want Haskell to be a beautiful, elegant language, not one riddled with inconsistencies, grandfathered in simply because fixing the inconsistency would risk some breakage.

We can't navigate this tension with simple all-or-nothing rules.  We have to take each case on its merits, aware of both sets of costs.  This section describes some general rules, or principles, that we use to guide our stability-related discussions for GHC itself.  See also `GHC base library proposal <https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/blob/main/proposals/accepted/051-ghc-base-libraries.rst>`_, which focuses on the stability of the ``base`` library API.

Assumptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> We assume that we have identified some extensions as "Experimental".  These extensions may well change, and are subject to much weaker stability goals.  `GHC Proposal #625 <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/625>`_ is devoted to agreeing this list.

Author: > Should this refer to https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/discussions/635 (which is not, yet, a proposal)?

Thanks, now corrected

as we hope not to make the current situation worse.

From `#378`_, slightly generalized.

GHC stability principles
--------------------------

The Haskell ecosystem has a built-in tension between stability and innovation.

One the one hand, breaking changes impose heavy costs:

* Users keep having to update their code
* Library authors keep having to update their code
* Updating to a later version of a library can in turn force taking on new dependencies.

These difficulties add friction, discourage adoption, and make Haskell an unpredictable investment.

On the other hand, GHC has always sought to be a laboratory for innovation.  If the stability guarantees are too onerous, we risk imposing a different set of costs:

* Volunteers may get discouraged by the hoops they have to jump through to get a change agreed.
* The language may become stuck in a local optimum, because moving to a better design would require breaking changes.
* We want Haskell to be a beautiful, elegant language, not one riddled with inconsistencies, grandfathered in simply because fixing the inconsistency would risk some breakage.

> We can't navigate this tension with simple all-or-nothing rules.  We have to take each case on its merits, aware of both sets of costs.  Rather than starting the debate from scratch each time, we can have some general rules, or principles, to guide us.  The `GHC base library proposal <https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/blob/main/proposals/accepted/051-ghc-base-libraries.rst>`_ made a start in this direction; this section discusses GHC itself.

Reviewer 4: This paragrap will read rather awkward when merged. It sounds like something is being proposed, but when merged, it'll be, instead, admitted, I'd suggest something like:

```suggestion
We can't navigate this tension with simple all-or-nothing rules.  We have to take each case on its merits, aware of both sets of costs.  This section describes the principles that we use to judge proposals on stability (see also the `GHC base library proposal <https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/blob/main/proposals/accepted/051-ghc-base-libraries.rst>`_ which describes how GHC proposals can grow the base library in keeping with the stability guarantees).
```

Assumptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~

We assume:

> * That we have adopted the  `GHC base library proposal <https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/blob/main/proposals/accepted/051-ghc-base-libraries.rst>`_, which establishes the ``ghc-experimental`` package.

Reviewer 4: This has been adopted correct? No need for it to be an assumption.
```suggestion
```
